<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>LXXI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-71" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Evelina in Continuation</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Clifton, <time datetime="10-01">October 1st</time>.</p>
			</header>
			<p>I have only time, my dearest Sir, for three words, to overtake my last letter, and prevent your expecting me immediately; for, when I communicated my intention to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn, she would not hear of it, and declared it would be highly ridiculous for me to go before I received an answer to my intelligence concerning the journey from Paris. She has, therefore, insisted upon my waiting till your next letter arrives. I hope you will not be displeased at my compliance, though it is rather against my own judgment: but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn quite overpowered me with the force of her arguments. I will, however, see very little of Lord Orville; I will never come downstairs before breakfast; give up all my walks in the garden; seat myself next to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn; and not merely avoid his conversation, but shun his presence. I will exert all the prudence and all the resolution in my power, to prevent this short delay from giving you any further uneasiness.</p>
			<p>Adieu, my dearest Sir. I shall not now leave Clifton till I have your directions.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
