<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Letter LXIX: Evelina in Continuation</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-69" epub:type="chapter z3998:letter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Letter</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Evelina in Continuation</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline"><time datetime="09-30"><abbr epub:type="z3998:truncation">Sept.</abbr> 30th</time>.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Oh, Sir, what a strange incident have I to recite! what a field of conjecture to open!</p>
			<p>Yesterday evening we all went to an assembly. Lord Orville presented tickets to the whole family; and did me the honour, to the no small surprise of all here, I believe, to dance with me. But every day abounds in fresh instances of his condescending politeness; and he now takes every opportunity of calling me his friend and his sister.</p>
			<p>Lord Merton offered a ticket to Lady Louisa; but she was so much incensed against him, that she refused it with the utmost disdain: neither could he prevail upon her to dance with him; she sat still the whole evening, and deigned not to look at or speak to him. To me her behaviour is almost the same: for she is cold, distant, and haughty, and her eyes express the greatest contempt. But for Lord Orville, how miserable would my residence here make me!</p>
			<p>We were joined in the ballroom by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Coverley, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovel, and Lord Merton, who looked as if he was doing penance, and sat all the evening next to Lady Louisa, vainly endeavouring to appease her anger.</p>
			<p>Lord Orville began the minuets: he danced with a young lady who seemed to engage the general attention, as she had not been seen here before. She is pretty, and looks mild and good-humoured.</p>
			<p>“Pray, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovel,” said Lady Louisa, “who is that?”</p>
			<p>“Miss Belmont,” answered he, “the young heiress: she came to the Wells yesterday.”</p>
			<p>Struck with the name, I involuntarily repeated it; but nobody heard me.</p>
			<p>“What is her family?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Beaumont.</p>
			<p>“Have you not heard of her, Ma’am?” cried he; “she is only daughter and heiress of Sir John Belmont.”</p>
			<p>Good Heaven, how did I start! the name struck my ear like a thunderbolt. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn, who immediately looked at me, said, “Be calm, my dear, and we will learn the truth of all this.”</p>
			<p>Till then I had never imagined her to be acquainted with my story; but she has since told me, that she knew my unhappy mother, and was well informed of the whole affair.</p>
			<p>She asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovel a multitude of questions; and I gathered from his answers, that this young lady was just come from abroad with Sir John Belmont, who was now in London; that she was under the care of his sister, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Paterson; and that she would inherit a considerable estate.</p>
			<p>I cannot express the strange feelings with which I was agitated during this recital. What, my dearest Sir, can it possibly mean? Did you ever hear of any after-marriage?⁠—or must I suppose, that, while the lawful child is rejected, another is adopted?⁠—I know not what to think! I am bewildered with a contrariety of ideas!</p>
			<p>When we came home, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn passed more than an hour in my room conversing upon this subject. She says, that I ought instantly to go to town, find out my father, and have the affair cleared up. She assures me I have too strong a resemblance to my dear, though unknown, mother, to allow of the least hesitation in my being owned, when once I am seen. For my part, I have no wish but to act by your direction.</p>
			<p>I cannot give any account of the evening; so disturbed, so occupied am I by this subject, that I can think of no other. I have entreated <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn to observe the strictest secrecy, and she has promised that she will. Indeed, she has too much sense to be idly communicative.</p>
			<p>Lord Orville took notice of my being absent and silent; but I ventured not to entrust him with the cause. Fortunately, he was not of the party at the time <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Lovel made the discovery.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Selwyn says, that if you approve my going to town, she will herself accompany me. I had a thousand times rather ask the protection of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Mirvan, but, after this offer that will not be possible.</p>
			<p>Adieu, my dearest Sir. I am sure you will write immediately, and I shall be all impatience till your letter arrives.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
